Add the design doc for Volume v1 (#1532)
scality/metalk8s: docs/developer/design/volume_v1.0.rst

> Volume management v1.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Volume Management v1.0
```

Author: Done

======================

* MetalK8s-Version: 2.4
* Replaces:

> * Superceded-By:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Superseded-By:
```

see https://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/supercede

Author: Done

Absract
-------

To be able to run stateful services (such as Prometheus, Zenko or Hyperdrive),
MetalK8s needs the ability to provide and manage persistent storage resources.

To do so we introduce the concept of MetalK8s **Volume**, using a **Custom
Resource Definition** (CRD), built on top of the existing concept of
**Persistent Volume** from Kubernetes. Those **Custom Resources** (CR) will be
managed by a dedicated Kubernetes operator which will be responsible for the
storage preparation (using Salt states) and lifetime management of the backing
**Persistent Volume**.

Volume management will be available from the Platform UI (through a dedicated

> tab under the node page). There, users will be able to create, monitor and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
tab under the Node page). There, users will be able to create, monitor and
```
not sure

Author: Done

delete MetalK8s volumes.

Scope
-----

The scope of this first version of Volume Management will be minimalist but
still functionally useful.

> Goal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Goals
```

Author: Done

^^^^

> * support two kinds of **Volume**: **sparseLoopDevice** (backed by a sparse

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* support two kinds of **Volume**:

  * **sparseLoopDevice** (backed by a sparse file)
  * **rawBlockDevice** (using whole disk)
```

Author: Done

  file) and **rawBlockDevice** (using whole disk)
* add support for volume creation (one by one) in the Platform UI
* add support for volume deletion (one by one) in the Platform UI
* add support for volume listing/monitoring (show status, size, …) in the
  Platform UI
* document how to create a volume

> * document how to create a storage class

Reviewer: At this point we have no clue (at least I don't) what is a storage class regarding to what has been described.

Author: `StorageClass` is a Kubernetes concept so we're not defining what it is (unlike `Volume` which is a custom MetalK8s concept that we introduce here).

Same goes for `PersistentVolume` (it's not defined/explained here).

That being said, I'll replace `storage class` by `StorageClass object`, it may be clearer that we're talking about a k8s object.

Design document being rather technical, I think we can expect people knowing about those concepts (and if not, to know where to find info), it's not really user-facing documentation.

* automated tests on volume workflow (creation, deletion, …)

> Non-Goal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Non-Goals
```

Author: Done

^^^^^^^^

* RAID support
* LVM support
* expose raw block device (unformated) as **Volume**
* use an **Admission Controller** for semantic validation

> * auto-discovery of the disks

Reviewer: What is a disk in this context?

Author: hard drive/SSD and probably RAID as well (I don't know exactly what Alex's script auto-discover, since it was out of scope I didn't dive into this part).

> * batch provisioning from the UI

Reviewer: I guess `batch management` would be wider

Author: Not sure we want "batch management" at this point.

- creation: yeah very likely
- edition: volume cannot be modified after creation
- deletion: according to Xavier, they rarely delete volume so batch deletion not really wanted for now

so I think `batch provisioning` is more precise (for now).

Proposal
--------

To implement this feature we need to:

* define and deploy a new CRD describing a MetalK8s Volume

> * develop and deploy a new Kubernetes operator to manage the MetalK8s volumes

Reviewer: should we use `Volumes` or `volumes`?

Author: I would say it depends if we talk about the concept or the object.

Line above use `Volume` because the CRD describe the schema of the object (but I'll use bold font to make it clearer)

* develop new Salt states to prepare and cleanup underlying storage on the
  nodes
* update the Platform UI to allow volume management

User stories
^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Volume creation

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Volume Creation
```
Let's have all our titles capitalized?

Author: Yes, you're right.

Done

~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> As a user I need to be able to create MetalK8s volume from the Platform UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a user I need to be able to create a MetalK8s volume from the Platform UI.
```
Again, `Volume` or `volume`?

Author: Here both would fit: you need to be able to create a `Volume` object, but also a volume in the conceptual sense.
Since we're talking from a user point of view, let's focus on the concept rather than the object.

> At creation time and can specify the type of volume I want, and then either its

Reviewer: Beginning of this sentence is weird

Author: Fixed

> At creation time and can specify the type of volume I want, and then either its

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
At creation time I can specify the type of volume I want, and then either its
```

Author: Was done when addressing Charles' comments

size (for **sparseLoopDevice**) or the backing device (for **rawBlockDevice**).

> I should be able monitor the progression of the volume creation from the UI and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I should be able monitor the progression of the volume creation from the Platform UI and
```

Author: Done

> I should be able monitor the progression of the volume creation from the UI and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I should be able monitor the progress of the volume creation from the UI and
```

Author: Done

see when the volume is ready to use (or if an error occured).

Volume monitoring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> As a user I should be able to see all the volume existing on a specified node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As a user I should be able to see all the volumes existing on a specified node
```

Author: Done

> as well as their state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
as well as their states.
```

Author: Done

Volume deletion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a user I need to be able to delete a MetalK8s volume from the Platform UI
when I no longer need it.

> The UI should prevent me to delete used Volume.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Platform UI should prevent me to delete a used Volume.
```

Author: Done

> The UI should prevent me to delete used Volume.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The UI should prevent me from deleting Volumes in use.
```

Author: Done

> I should be able monitor the progression of the volume deletion from the UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
I should be able monitor the progression of the volume deletion from the Platform UI.
```

Author: Done

> I should be able monitor the progression of the volume deletion from the UI.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
I should be able monitor the progress of the volume deletion from the UI.
```

Author: Done

Components interactions
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> User will create Metalk8s volume through the Platform UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
User will create Metalk8s volumes through the Platform UI.
```

Author: Done

The Platform UI will create and delete **Volume** CRs from the API server.

> The operator will watch event related to **Volume** CRs and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The operator will watch events related to **Volume** CRs and
```

Author: Done

> **PersistentVolume** owned by **Volume** and react in order to update the state

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**PersistentVolumes** owned by **Volumes** and react in order to update the state
```

Author: Done (a bit differently because I don't want to add `s` to the object name)

of the cluster to meet the desired state (prepare storage when a new **Volume**

> CR is created, cleanup resources when a **Volume** CR is deleted). It will also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CR is created, clean up resources when a **Volume** CR is deleted). It will also
```

Author: Done

> be responsible for updating the status of the volumes.

Reviewer: states or statuses?

Author: states

> To do its job, the operator will relies on Salt states that will be called

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To do its job, the operator will rely on Salt states that will be called
```

Author: Done

asynchronously (to avoid blocking the reconciliation loop and keep a reactive
system) through the Salt API. Authentication to the Salt API will be done
though a dedicated Salt account (with limited privileges) using credentials
from a dedicated cluster **Service Account**.

> .. uml:: volume_v1.0-creation_seqdiag.uml

Reviewer 2: Would be nice to have these as clickable embeds, since they're more legible when full size.

Author: Yeah, clearly.

How can I do that?

Author: Didn't find an easy to do it from the doc [here](https://pypi.org/project/sphinxcontrib-plantuml/)

.. uml:: volume_v1.0-deletion_seqdiag.uml

Implementation details
----------------------

Volume status
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A **PersistentVolume** from Kubernetes has the following states:

> * **Pending**: used for PersistentVolumes that are not available

Reviewer: Let's stay with singular here

Author: Done

* **Available**: a free resource that is not yet bound to a claim
* **Bound**: the volume is bound to a claim
* **Released**: the claim has been deleted, but the resource is not yet
  reclaimed by the cluster
* **Failed**: the volume has failed its automatic reclamation

Similarly, our **Volume** object will have the following states:

* **Available**: the backing storage is ready and the associated
  **PersistentVolume** was created
* **Pending**: preparation of the backing storage in progress (e.g.

>   asynchronous Salt call are still running).

Reviewer: singular/plural?

Author: singular

* **Failed**: something is wrong with the volume (Salt state execution failed,
  invalid value in the CRD, …)
* **Terminating**: cleanup of the backing storage in progress (e.g.

>   asynchronous Salt call are still running).

Reviewer: singular/plural?

Author: ditto

Operator reconciliation loop
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reconciliation loop (top level)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> When the operator receive a request, the first thing it does is to fetch the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the operator receives a request, the first thing it does is to fetch the
```

Author: Done

**Volume** object and then start the preparation of the storage using an
asynchronous Salt call (which gives a job ID) before rescheduling the request
to monitor the evolution of the job.

If the **Volume** object has a job ID, then the storage preparation is in
progress and the operator will monitor it until it's over.
If the Salt job ends with an error, the operator will move the volume into a
failed state.

Otherwise (Salt job succeeded), the operator will proceed with the
**PersistentVolume creation** (which require an extra Salt call, synchronous
this time, to get the volume size), taking care of putting a finalizer on the
**PersistentVolume** (so that its lifetime is tied to the **Volume** one) and
set the **Volume** as the owner of the created **PersistentVolume**.

Once the **PersistentVolume** is successfuly created, the operator will move
the **Volume** to the `Available` state and reschedule the request (the next
iteration will check the health of the **PersistentVolume** just created).

.. uml:: volume_v1.0-deploy_volume_flowchart.uml

.. _volume-finalization:

Volume finalization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

> **Volume** in state **Pending** cannot be deleted (because the operator don't

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Volume** in state **Pending** cannot be deleted (because the operator doesn't
```

Author: Done

> know where they are in the creation process). In such cases, the operator will

Reviewer: use singular

Author: Done

we reschedule the request until the volume becomes either **Failed** or
**Available**.

For volumes with no backing **PersistentVolume**, the operator will directly
reclaim the storage on the node (using an asynchronous Salt job) and upon

> completion it will remove the **Volume** finalize to let Kubernetes delete the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
completion it will remove the **Volume** finalizer to let Kubernetes delete the
```

Author: Done

object.

If there is a backing **PersistentVolume**, the operator will delete it (if
it's not already in a terminating state) and watch for the moment when it
becomes unused (this is done by rescheduling). Once the backing
**PersistentVolume** becomes unused, the operator will reclaim its storage and

> remove the finalizers to let the object be deleted.

Reviewer: singular or plural for finalizers?

Author: plural (we remove finalizer on both PV and Volume in this case).

.. uml:: volume_v1.0-finalize_volume_flowchart.uml

Volume deletion criteria
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A volume should be deletable from the UI when it's deletable from a user point
of view (you can always delete an object from the API), i.e. when deleting the
object will trigger an "immediate" deletion (i.e.: the object won't be
retained).

Here are the few rules that are followed to decide if a **Volume** can be
deleted or not:

- **Pending** states are left untouched: we wait for the completion of the
  pending action before deciding which action to take.
- The lack of status information is a transient state (can happen between the
  **Volume** creation and the first iteration of the reconciliation loop) and
  thus we make no decision while the status is unset.

> - **Volume** whose **PersistentVolume** is bound cannot be deleted

Reviewer: Missing endpoint

Author: Done

To implement this feature we need to:

* define and deploy a new CRD describing a MetalK8s **Volume**
* develop and deploy a new Kubernetes operator to manage the MetalK8s volumes
* develop new Salt states to prepare and cleanup underlying storage on the
  nodes
* update the Platform UI to allow volume management

User Stories
^^^^^^^^^^^^

Volume Creation
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a user I need to be able to create MetalK8s volume from the Platform UI.

At creation time I can specify the type of volume I want, and then either its
size (for **sparseLoopDevice**) or the backing device (for **rawBlockDevice**).

I should be able monitor the progress of the volume creation from the Platform
UI and see when the volume is ready to use (or if an error occured).

Volume Monitoring
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a user I should be able to see all the volumes existing on a specified node
as well as their states.

Volume Deletion
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

As a user I need to be able to delete a MetalK8s volume from the Platform UI
when I no longer need it.

The Platform UI should prevent me from deleting Volumes in use.

I should be able monitor the progress of the volume deletion from the Platform
UI.

> Components Interactions

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Component Interactions
```
not sure though

Reviewer 2: ~I agree.~ Wait, no. `Storage components lifecycle` ? Or `Components lifecycle`?

Author: Why `lifecycle` over `interactions`?

Reviewer 2: Because I'm struggling with how to write this in a non-awkward fashion :p I'm not sure which is the correct way to pluralize (or not) this title.

With a rested brain @nootal 's way seems correct

Author: Done

system) through the Salt API. Authentication to the Salt API will be done
though a dedicated Salt account (with limited privileges) using credentials
from a dedicated cluster **Service Account**.

.. uml:: volume_v1.0-creation_seqdiag.uml

.. uml:: volume_v1.0-deletion_seqdiag.uml

Implementation Details
----------------------

Volume Status
^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A **PersistentVolume** from Kubernetes has the following states:

* **Pending**: used for **PersistentVolume** that is not available
* **Available**: a free resource that is not yet bound to a claim
* **Bound**: the volume is bound to a claim
* **Released**: the claim has been deleted, but the resource is not yet
  reclaimed by the cluster
* **Failed**: the volume has failed its automatic reclamation

Similarly, our **Volume** object will have the following states:

* **Available**: the backing storage is ready and the associated
  **PersistentVolume** was created
* **Pending**: preparation of the backing storage in progress (e.g.
  an asynchronous Salt call is still running).
* **Failed**: something is wrong with the volume (Salt state execution failed,
  invalid value in the CRD, …)

> * **Terminating**: cleanup of the backing storage in progress (e.g.

Reviewer 2: Shouldn't this be `i.e.`?

Author: No, because that's not the only case (but the most common one).

You enter the `Terminating` state once you do the Salt call, but after the call you have other steps such as deleting the finalizers, if you have network issues this may need retries and meanwhile you'll stay in `Terminating` state.

  an asynchronous Salt call is still running).

Operator Reconciliation Loop
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Reconciliation Loop (Top Level)
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

When the operator receives a request, the first thing it does is to fetch the
targeted **Volume**.
If it doesn't exist, which happens when a volume is **Terminating** and has no
finalizer, then there nothing more to do.

If the volume does exist, the operator has to check its semantic validity.

Once pre-checks are done, there are four cases:

1. the volume is marked for deletion: the operator will try to delete the
   volume (more details in :ref:`volume-finalization`).
2. the volume is stuck in an unrecoverable (automatically at least) error

>    state: the operatot can't do anything here: the request is considered done

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   state: the operator can't do anything here, the request is considered done
```

Author: Done

   and won't be rescheduled.

> 3. the volume doesn't have a backing **PersistentVolume** (e.g.: newly created

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. the volume doesn't have a backing **PersistentVolume** (e.g. newly created
```

Author: Done

   volume): the operator will deploy the volume
   (more details in :ref:`volume-deployment`).
4. the backing **PersistentVolume** exists: the operator will check its status
   to update the volume's status accordingly.

.. uml:: volume_v1.0-main_loop_flowchart.uml

.. _volume-deployment:

Volume Deployment
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

To deploy a volume, the operator needs to prepare its storage (using Salt) and
create a backing **PersistentVolume**.

> If the **Volume** object has no value in its field ``Job``, it means that the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If the **Volume** object has no value in its ``Job`` field, it means that the
```

Author: Done

deployment hasn't started, thus the operator will set a finalizer on the
**Volume** object and then start the preparation of the storage using an
asynchronous Salt call (which gives a job ID) before rescheduling the request
to monitor the evolution of the job.

If the **Volume** object has a job ID, then the storage preparation is in
progress and the operator will monitor it until it's over.
If the Salt job ends with an error, the operator will move the volume into a
failed state.

> Otherwise (Salt job succeeded), the operator will proceed with the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Otherwise (i.e. Salt job succeeded), the operator will proceed with the
```

Author: Done

> **PersistentVolume creation** (which require an extra Salt call, synchronous

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**PersistentVolume creation** (which requires an extra Salt call, synchronous
```

Author: Done

this time, to get the volume size), taking care of putting a finalizer on the

> **PersistentVolume** (so that its lifetime is tied to the **Volume** one) and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**PersistentVolume** (so that its lifetime is tied to the **Volume**'s) and
```

Author: Done

.. _volume-finalization:

Volume Finalization
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A **Volume** in state **Pending** cannot be deleted (because the operator
doesn't know where it is in the creation process). In such cases, the
operator will we reschedule the request until the volume becomes either
**Failed** or **Available**.

For volumes with no backing **PersistentVolume**, the operator will directly
reclaim the storage on the node (using an asynchronous Salt job) and upon
completion it will remove the **Volume** finalizer to let Kubernetes delete the
object.

If there is a backing **PersistentVolume**, the operator will delete it (if
it's not already in a terminating state) and watch for the moment when it
becomes unused (this is done by rescheduling). Once the backing
**PersistentVolume** becomes unused, the operator will reclaim its storage and
remove the finalizers to let the object be deleted.

.. uml:: volume_v1.0-finalize_volume_flowchart.uml

Volume Deletion Criteria
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

A volume should be deletable from the UI when it's deletable from a user point
of view (you can always delete an object from the API), i.e. when deleting the

> object will trigger an "immediate" deletion (i.e.: the object won't be

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
object will trigger an "immediate" deletion (i.e. the object won't be
```

Author: Done

retained).

Here are the few rules that are followed to decide if a **Volume** can be
deleted or not:

- **Pending** states are left untouched: we wait for the completion of the
  pending action before deciding which action to take.
- The lack of status information is a transient state (can happen between the
  **Volume** creation and the first iteration of the reconciliation loop) and
  thus we make no decision while the status is unset.

> - **Volume** whose **PersistentVolume** is bound cannot be deleted.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Volumes** whose **PersistentVolume** is bound cannot be deleted.
```

Author: Done

> - **Volume** in **Terminating** state cannot be deleted because their deletion

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- **Volumes** in **Terminating** state cannot be deleted because their deletion
```

Author: Done
